---
bibliography: ./hs3.bib
---


## Functions {#sec:functions} 
The top-level component `functions` describes an array of mathematical functions in struct format to be used as helper objects. Similar to distributions each entry is [required]{.smallcaps} to have the components `type` and `name`. Other components are dependent on the kind of functions. The field `name` is [required]{.smallcaps} and may be any custom unique string. Functions in general have the following components: 

-   `name`: custom unique string 
-   `type`: string that determines the kind of function, e.g. `sum` 
-   `...`: each function has individual parameter keys for the various     individual parameters. For example, functions of type `sum` have the     parameter key `summands`. In general, these keys can describe     strings as references to other objects or numbers. Depending on the     parameter and the type of function, they appear either in single     item or array format. 

```json title="Example: Functions"
"functions": [ 
	{ 
		"name" : "sum1", 
		"type" : "sum", 
		"summands" : [1.8, "prod1", "param_xy"] 
	}, 
	... 
]
``` 

Any input of a function may refer to the output of another function via
it name, as in `"some_arg" : "some_function"`,
`"summands" : [..., "some_function", ...]` and similar.

The inputs of a function may also refer to the variate of a distribution via
its name, like in `"some_arg" : "some_distribution"`. Note, though, that
function arguments will often be scalar and that distribution variates are
always named tuples in this standard. So in practice, one will often use
a function like `get_property` in between (see below for an example).

### Single property accessor
Extracts a single property from a record.

-   `name`: custom unique string 
-   `type`: `get_property` 
-   `from`: A function or distribution name or a literal value.
-   `select`: the name of the property to be extracted from the input.
  
Example:

```json title="Example: Single property accessor"
"functions": [ 
	{ 
		"name" : "gauss1__data_x", 
		"type" : "get_property", 
		"from" : "gauss1", 
		"select" : "data_x" 
	},
	{ 
		"name" : "sum2", 
		"type" : "sum", 
		"summands" : ["gauss1__data_x", 1.0] 
	}, 
	... 
]
```

### Multi-property accessors
Extract and rename multiple properties from a record.

-   `name`: custom unique string 
-   `type`: `get_properties` 
-   `from`: A function or distribution name or a literal value.
-   `select`: an array of names of the properties to be extracted from the input.
-   `as`: an array of new names for the extracted properties.
  
Example:

```json title="Example: Multi property accessor"
"distributions": [ 
	{ 
		"name" : "mvnormal1", 
		"type" : "multivariate_normal_dist",
		"x": ["a", "b", "c"],
		"mean" : [...],
		"covariance" : [...]
	},
	...
],
"functions": [ 
	{ 
		"name" : "values_d_e", 
		"type" : "get_properties",
		"from" : "mv_normal1",
		"select": ["a", "c"],
		"as" : ["d", "e"]
	}, 
	... 
]
```

### Array element accessor
Extracts a single element from an array.

-   `name`: custom unique string 
-   `type`: `get_element` 
-   `from`: A function or distribution name or a literal array value.
-   `select`: An integer index `i`, or (for multi-dimensional arrays) an
-   array of integer indices `[i, j, ...]`.
  
Example (extract the third element of the variate of a multivariate Normal
distribution):

```json title="Example: Array element accessor"
"distributions": [ 
	{ 
		"name" : "mvnormal2", 
		"type" : "multivariate_normal_dist",
		"x": "A",
		"mean" : [...],
		"covariance" : [...]
	},
	...
],
"functions": [ 
	{ 
		"name" : "mvnormal2_A1", 
		"type" : "get_element",
		"from" : "mv_normal2",
		"select": 3
	}, 
	... 
]
```

### Array multi-element accessor
Extracts multiple elements from an array and names them.

-   `name`: custom unique string 
-   `type`: `get_elements` 
-   `from`: a name that refers to a function or distribution or a literal value.
-   `select`: A array of integer indices `[i1, i2, ...]` or (for
    multi-dimensional arrays) an array of arrays of integer indices
    `[[i1, j1, ...], [i2, j2, ...], ...]`.
-   `as`: An array of new names for the extracted elements.
  
Example (extract the third element of the variate of a multivariate Normal
distribution):

```json title="Example: Array multi-element accessor"
"distributions": [ 
	{ 
		"name" : "mvnormal2", 
		"type" : "multivariate_normal_dist",
		"x": "A",
		"mean" : [...],
		"covariance" : [...]
	},
	...
],
"functions": [ 
	{ 
		"name" : "mvnormal2_abc", 
		"type" : "get_elements",
		"from" : "mv_normal2",
		"select": [1, 2, 3],
		"as": ["a", "b", "c"]
	}, 
	... 
]
```

### Named tuple constructor
Constructs a record from individual values.

-   `name`: custom unique string 
-   `type`: `named_tuple` 
-   `properties`: An array of property name strings for the resulting record.
-   `values`: An array of function names, distribution names and literal values.

Example (generates named tuples `(x = ..., y = ..., z = ...)`):

```json title="Example: Named tuple constructor"
"functions": [ 
	{ 
		"name" : "mvnormal2_abc", 
		"type" : "named_tuple",
		"properties": ["x", "y", "z"],
		"values": ["mvnormal2_A1", 4.2, "some_other_function"]
	}, 
	... 
]
```

### Product 
A product of values or functions $a_i$. 



$$
\begin{aligned} \text{Prod} &= \prod_i^n a_i \end{aligned} 
$$



-   `name`: custom unique string 
-   `type`: `product` 
-   `factors`: array of names of the elements of the product or numbers. 

### Sum 
A sum of values or functions $a_i$. 

$$
\begin{aligned} \text{Sum} &= \sum_i^n a_i \end{aligned} 
$$

-   `name`: custom unique string 
-   `type`: `sum` 
-   `summands`: array of names of the elements of the sum or numbers. 

### Generic Function 
*Note: Users should prefer the specific functions defined in this standard over generic functions where possible, as implementations of these will typically be more optimized. Generic functions should only be used if no equivalent specific distribution is defined.* 
A generic function is defined by an expression. The expression must be a valid HS<sup>3</sup>-expression string (see Section 
[Generic Expressions](#sec:generic_expression){reference-type="ref" reference="sec:generic_expression"}). 

-   `name`: custom unique string 
-   `type`: `generic_function` 
-   `expression`: a string with a generic mathematical expression.     Simple mathematical syntax common to programming languages should be     used here, such as `x-2*y+z`. For any non-elementary operations, the     behavior is undefined. 
